.. _1000_brains:

An example dataset conversion
-----------------------------

This section demonstrates a concrete conversion for a full, complex neuroimaging
study, the first phase of the `studyforrest project <http://www.studyforrest.org/>`_.


Studyforrest phase 1
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The studyforrest project is a large neuroscientific project to study the human
brain under the influence of stimuli that resemble the complexity of a natural
enviroment more closely than standard, simplified MRI experiments. It encompasses
a range of data collections centered on the feature-rich movie Forrest Gump.
The first phase of the project was `published in 2014 <http://www.nature.com/articles/sdata20143>`_.
It comprises of fMRI recordings of 20 participants in a 7T MR scanner during
prolonged stimulation with an auditory-only version of Forrest Gump, and a large
number of auxilliary data: several other MRI modalities (T1, T2, diffusion weighted
images, susceptibility-weighted images, angiography data; in part acquired on a
3T machine), measurements to assess technical and physiological noise components
such as cardiac response, respiratory traces, and motion estimates, and all
source code for the implemented procedures.

In addition to the audio movie, a 7T acquisition with music stimulation from the
same subjects was added,

.. todo::

   What exactly comprises the phase 1 dataset? release_history.txt is substantial!

Data overview
"""""""""""""

The audio movie was presented in eight approximately 15 minute long segments,
split into two sessions with 4 segments each and a flexible break in between.

.. todo::

   outline the directory structure of the raw dataset



Data "suboptimalities"
""""""""""""""""""""""

The study is a very complex one: There are multiple acquisitions and sessions, multiple
acquired modalities, and a large amount of auxiliary data. This on its own
makes restructuring a large effort. However, as the acquisition is quite complex,
not everything went smooth during scanning. The following problems were discovered
in the raw data:

- subject 5 and 20 had aborted runs

.. todo::

   figure out problems. Bens script has them, but I can't access the script

While the exact ways in which the acquisitions had problems are idiosyncratic,
it is normal that neuroimaging studies contain aborted runs, or similar issues.
The conversion section below shows how the studyforrest problems were customly
addressed as an example on how to deal with such problems

Conversion
^^^^^^^^^^

.. todo::

   demonstrate conversion concretely, maybe on a single subject.


Resources
^^^^^^^^^

- Read up on the full study-forrest project at `studyforrest.org <http://studyforrest.org/>`_
- Read the phase 1 publication in Nature Scientific data: `www.nature.com/articles/sdata20143 <http://www.nature.com/articles/sdata20143>`_
- Get the data as a DataLad dataset from TODO

.. rubric:: Footnotes