.. _ukintro:

Being FAIR at scale
-------------------

FAIR data analysis projects need ...

.. todo::

   Detail core aspects of FAIR data projects

This chapter is a write-up about a gigantic data analysis usecase: Preprocessing
the `UKBiobank dataset <https://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/>`_ with open software
tools in a FAIR fashion on a super computer.


The UKBiobank data
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The UKBiobank project is a large long-term study that is collecting longitudinal
data on about 500.000 volunteers for a duration of at least 30 years, starting in 2006.
It aims to study the influence of genetic predispositions and environmental factors
on the development of diseases, and collects and distributes a variety of health
and life style related data.
Among other data, the UKBiobank dataset contains genetic data from blood samples,
data on cognitive function, mental health, diet, and physical activity of participants,
and some participant data is also linked to health records from general
practitioners and hospitals.
In 2014, a subset of the sample was recruited for collecting additional imaging
data as part of the `MRI Imaging study <https://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/scanning-study-launches/>`_.
In total, 100.000 participants brains will be scanned in the wake of this addition,
making the imaging study component the largest brain imaging study ever conducted.
By now, data from several ten thousand participants was already released.

.. todo::

   What exactly is in the UKB data?


Difficulties for data analysis

Difficulties for data analysis stem from two different aspects. For one, and
primarily, the size of the dataset is enormous, both in size and in number of
files.
Compressed data alone amounts to ??? GB per participant.
When processed
When complete, the 100.000 participant directories will surpass the
64k subdirectory limit of common file systems.