.. _modify:

Modify content
--------------

So far, we've only added new content to the dataset. And we have not done
much to that content up to this point, to be honest. Let's see what happens if
we add content, and then modify it.

For this, in the root of ``DataLad-101``, create a simple text file
called ``notes.txt``. It will contain all of the notes that you take
throughout the course.

Use an editor of your choice and write a short summary of how to create
a DataLad dataset from scratch. The code below contains the note within
the start and end part of a `here document <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Here_document>`_:

  "One can create a new dataset with 'datalad create
  [--description] PATH'. The dataset is created empty".

This is meant to be a note you would take in an educational course.
You can take this note and write it to a file with an editor.
But you can also copy the full code snippet, starting
from ``cat << EOT > notes.txt``, including the ``EOT`` in the last line, in your
terminal to write this note into ``notes.txt``.

.. findoutmore:: How does a here-document work?

   The code snippet below makes sure to write lines of text into a
   file (that so far does not exist) called ``notes.txt``.

   To do this, the content of the "document" is wrapped in between
   *delimiting identifiers*. Here, these identifiers are *EOT* (short
   for "end of text"), but naming is arbitrary as long as the two identifiers
   are identical. The first "EOT" identifies the start of the text stream, and
   the second "EOT" terminates the text stream.

   The characters ``<<`` redirect the text stream into
   `"standard input" (stdin) <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_streams#Standard_input_(stdin)>`_,
   the standard location that provides the *input* for a command.
   Thus, the text stream becomes the input for the
   `cat command <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cat_(Unix)>`_, which takes
   the input and writes it to
   `"standard output" (stdout) <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_streams#Standard_output_(stdout)>`_.

   Lastly, the ``>`` character takes ``stdout`` can creates a new file
   ``notes.txt`` with ``stdout`` as its contents.

   It might seem like a slightly convoluted way to create a text file with
   a simple note in it. But it allows to write notes from the terminal, enabling
   this book to create commands you can execute with nothing other than your terminal.
   You are free to copy-paste the snippets with the here-documents,
   or find a workflow that suites you better. The only thing important is that
   you create and modify a ``.txt`` file over the course of the Basics part of this
   handbook.

Running the command below will create ``notes.txt`` in the
root of your ``DataLad-101`` dataset:

.. runrecord:: _examples/DL-101-103-101
   :language: console
   :workdir: dl-101/DataLad-101
   :cast: 01_dataset_basics
   :notes: Let's find out how we can modify files in dataset. Lets create a text file with notes about the DataLad commands we learned. (maybe explain here docs)

   $ cat << EOT > notes.txt
   One can create a new dataset with 'datalad create [--description] PATH'.
   The dataset is created empty

   EOT

Run :command:`datalad status` to confirm that there is a new, untracked file:

.. runrecord:: _examples/DL-101-103-102
   :language: console
   :workdir: dl-101/DataLad-101
   :cast: 01_dataset_basics
   :notes: As expected, there is a new file in the dataset. At first the file is untracked. We can save without a path specification because it is the only existing modification

   $ datalad status

Save current state of this file in DataLad version history. Because it is the only modification
in the dataset, there is no need to specify a path.

.. runrecord:: _examples/DL-101-103-103
   :language: console
   :workdir: dl-101/DataLad-101
   :cast: 01_dataset_basics

   $ datalad save -m "Add notes on datalad create"

Modify this file by adding another note. After all, you already know how to use
:command:`datalad save`, so write a short summary on that as well.

Again, the example below uses Unix commands (``cat`` and redirecting, this time however
with ``>>`` to *append* new content to the existing file)
to accomplish this, but you can take any editor of your choice.

.. runrecord:: _examples/DL-101-103-104
   :language: console
   :workdir: dl-101/DataLad-101
   :cast: 01_dataset_basics
   :notes: Now let's start to modify this text file by adding more notes to it. Think about this being a code file that you add functions to:

   $ cat << EOT >> notes.txt
   The command "datalad save [-m] PATH" saves the file
   (modifications) to history. Note to self:
   Always use informative, concise commit messages.

   EOT

Let's check the dataset's current state:

.. runrecord:: _examples/DL-101-103-105
   :language: console
   :workdir: dl-101/DataLad-101
   :cast: 01_dataset_basics

   $ datalad status

and save the file in DataLad:

.. runrecord:: _examples/DL-101-103-106
   :language: console
   :workdir: dl-101/DataLad-101
   :cast: 01_dataset_basics
   :notes: The modification can simply be saved as well

   $ datalad save -m "add note on datalad save"

Let's take another look into our history to see the development of this file.
We're using :command:`git log -p -n 2` to see last two commits and explore
the difference to the previous state of a file within each commit.
Note: git log may be opened in a `pager <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Terminal_pager>`_.
You can get out of it by pressing ``q``.

.. runrecord:: _examples/DL-101-103-107
   :language: console
   :workdir: dl-101/DataLad-101
   :lines: 1-28
   :emphasize-lines: 6, 25, 27
   :cast: 01_dataset_basics
   :notes: An the history gives an accurate record of what happened to this file

   $ git log -p -n 2

We can see that the history can not only show us the commit message attached to
a commit, but also the precise change that occurred in the text file in the commit.
Additions are marked with a ``+``, and deletions would be shown with a leading ``-``.
That's quite neat, isn't it?

.. findoutmore:: git log has many more useful options

   ``git log``, as many other ``git`` commands, has a good number of options
   which you can discover if you run ``git log --help``.  Those options could
   help to find specific changes (e.g., which added or removed a specific word
   with ``-S``), or change how git log output will look (e.g.,
   ``--word-diff`` to highlight individual word changes in the ``-p`` output).
