.. _gobig:

Going big with DataLad
----------------------

All chapters throughout the Basics demonstrated "household quantity" examples.
Version controlling or analyzing data in datasets with a total size of up to a
few hundred GB, with some tens of thousands of files at maximum? Usually, this
should work fine. If you want to go beyond this scale, however, you should read
this section to learn how to properly scale up. As a general rule, consider this
section relevant once you have a usecase in which you would go substantially
beyond 100k files in a single dataset.

The contents of this chapter exist thanks to some pioneers that took a leap and
deep-dived into gigantic data management challenges. You can read up on some
of them in the usecases :ref:`usecase_HCP_dataset` and :ref:`usecase_datastore`.
Based on what we have learned so far from these endeavors,
this chapter encompasses principles, advice, and points of reference.

The introduction in this section illustrates the basic caveats when scaling up,
and points to benchmarks, rules of thumb, and general solutions.
Upcoming sections demonstrate how one can attempt
large-scale analyses with DataLad, and how to fix things up when dataset sizes
got out of hand.
The upcoming chapter :ref:`chapter_hpc`, finally, extends this chapter with advice and examples from large scale analyses on computational clusters.

Why scaling up Git repos can become difficult
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You already know that :term:`Git` does not scale well with *large* files.
As a Git repository stores every version of every file that is added to it,
large files that undergo regular modifications can inflate the size of a·project
significantly. Depending on how many large files are added to a pure Git
repository, this can not only have a devastating impact on the time it takes
to clone, fetch, or pull (from) a repository, but also on regular within-repository
operations, such as checking the state of the repository or switching branches.
Using :term:`git-annex` (either directly, or by using DataLad) can eliminate this
issue, but there is a second factor that can prevent scaling up with Git: The
*number* of files. One reason for this is that Git performs a large amount of
`stat system calls <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stat_(system_call)>`_
(used in :command:`git add` and :command:`git commit`). Repositories can thus
suffer greatly if they are swamped with files [#f1]_.

Given that DataLad builds up on Git, having datasets with large amounts of files
can lead to
`painfully slow operations <https://github.com/datalad/datalad/issues/3869>`_.
As a general rule of thumb, we will consider single datasets with 100k files or
more as "big" for the rest of this chapter. Starting at about this size we can
begin to see performance issues in datasets.
Bench marking in DataLad datasets with varying, but large amounts of tiny files
on different file systems and different git-annex repository versions show that
a mere :command:`datalad save` or :command:`datalad status` command
can take from 15 minutes up to several hours. Its neither fun nor feasible to
work with performance drops like this -- so how can this be avoided?

General advice: Use several subdatasets
=======================================

The general set-up for publishing or version controlling data in a scalable
way is to make use of subdatasets. Instead of a single dataset with 1 million
files, have 20, for example, with 50.000 files each, and link them as subdataset.
This will split the amount of files that need to be handled across several datasets,
and, at the same time, it also alleviates strain on the file system that would arise
if large amounts of files are kept in single directories.

How would that look like for a large scale dataset? In the use case
:ref:`usecase_HCP_dataset`, 80 million files with neuroscientific data from about
1200 participants are split into roughly 4500 subdatasets based on directory
structure. Each participant directory is a subdataset, and it contains several
more subdatasets, depending on how much data modalities are available. A similar
approach was chosen for the
`Datalad UKbiobank extension <https://github.com/datalad/datalad-ukbiobank>`_
that can enable to obtain and version control imaging releases of the up to
100000 participants of the `UKbiobank project <https://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/>`_.

**"But why use DataLad for this?"**
In principle, using many instead of a single repository/dataset for large amounts
of files is a measure that can be implemented with any of the tools involved,
be it Git, git-annex, or DataLad. What makes using DataLad well-suited
for such a scaling approach and distinguishes it from Git and git-annex, is that
it is way easier to link datasets and to operate across subdataset boundaries
recursively with the nesting capabilities [#f2]_ of DataLad.
Git provides functionality for nested repositories (so-called submodules,
also used by DataLad underneath the hood), but the workflows are by far not as
smooth. For a direct comparison between working with nested datasets and nested
Git repositories, take a look at
`this demo <https://youtu.be/Yrg6DgOcbPE?t=350>`_.

**How far does this scale?**
In preparation for assembling a complete UKBiobank dataset, simulations of
datasets with 40k and 100k subdatasets ran successfully.

.. findoutmore:: How do simulations like this work?

   With shell scripts such as this::

      #!/bin/bash
      set -x

      # build a dummy subdataset to be referenced 40k times:
      datalad create dummy_sub
      echo "whatever" > dummy_sub/some_file
      datalad save -d dummy_sub

      sub_id=$(datalad -f "{infos[dataset][id]}"  wtf -d dummy_sub)
      sub_commit=$(git -C dummy_sub show --no-patch --format=%H)


      # the actual super dataset and use some config procedure to get
      # an initial history
      datalad create -c yoda dummy_super_40k

      cd dummy_super_40k

      for ((i=1;i<=100000;i++)); do
          git config -f .gitmodules "submodule.sub$i.path" "sub$i";
          git config -f .gitmodules "submodule.sub$i.url" ../dummy_sub;
          git config -f .gitmodules "submodule.sub$i.datalad-id" "$sub_id";
          git update-index --add --replace --cacheinfo 160000 "$sub_commit" "sub$i";
      done;

      git add .gitmodules
      git commit -m "Add submodules"

   Note that this way of simulating subdatasets is speedier and simplified,
   because instead of cloning subdatasets, it makes use of Git's
   `update-index <https://git-scm.com/docs/git-update-index>`_ command and records the
   subdatasets by committing manual changes to ``.gitmodules``.

Do note, however, that these numbers of subdatasets may well exhaust your file
system's subdirectory limit (commonly at 64k).

Tool-specific and smaller advice
================================

- If you are interested in up-to-date performance benchmarks, take a look at
  `www.datalad.org/test_fs_analysis.html <https://www.datalad.org/test_fs_analysis.html>`_.
  This can help to set expectations and give useful comparisons of file systems
  or software versions.
- git-annex offers a range of tricks to further improve performance in large
  datasets. For example, it may be useful to not use a
  standalone git-annex build, but a native git-annex binary (see
  `this comment <https://github.com/datalad/datalad/issues/3869#issuecomment-557598390>`_)
- Status reports in datasets with large amounts of files and/or subdatasets can
  be expensive. Check out the Gist :ref:`speedystatus` for solutions.

.. todo::

   More here


.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#f1] For example: A Git repository with more than a million (albeit tiny) files
        `takes hours and hours to merely create <https://www.monperrus.net/martin/one-million-files-on-git-and-github>`_,
        if standard Git workflows are used.
        `This post <https://breckyunits.com/building-a-treebase-with-6-point-5-million-files.html>`_
        contains an entertaining description of what happens if one attempts to create
        a Git repository with 6.5 million files -- up to the point when some Git
        commands stop working.

.. [#f2] To reread on nesting DataLad datasets, check out sections :ref:`nesting`
         and :ref:`nesting2`